Computational Drug Design for Programmed Cell Death Protein 1 as a Potential Drug Treatment
Faculty Mentor: Dr. Bill Miller


	Background:
The treatment of cancer has had many forms over the past decade, but recently a new target has been discovered that has shown great promise. This target is known as Programmed Cell Death Protein 1 (PD1). Being in the age of personal genomics, it is now possible to test patients through whole-exome sequencing to identify whether the patients have the biomarkers for increased PDL1/PDL2 counts, which can cause the cancer to evade an immune response. This personal genomics strategy to medicine is vital to the future of patient treatment since we shouldn’t have a ‘one size fits all’ strategy for these life-threatening diseases. The treatments that have successfully targeted PD1 have been monoclonal antibody drugs since there hasn’t been a proper target location for small molecule inhibition until now.

PD1 is a type 1 membrane protein that consists of 288 amino acids and has a role in regulating the immune system’s response to the body’s cells by downregulating the immune system and promoting self-tolerance by suppressing T cell inflammatory activity (1).  PD1 does this by binding to one of its two ligands, programmed death-ligand 1 and 2 (PDL1 and PDL2). PDL1 and PDL2 are commonly mutated in tumor cells, amplifying how many copies are on the cell membrane. This means that the cancer cells can evade detection from the immune system by suppressing the T cell inflammatory response through suppressing the TCR signaling pathway (2). 

A recent study by Tang et al. found that there is a novel potential binding site on PD1 when bound to PDL2.  While PD1 is in this conformation (Figure 2), it would make a great candidate for small molecule inhibition. If a small molecule inhibitor was designed, this could lead to increases in global access as well as cancer treatment efficacy and safety. This research will build on this recent study and investigate potential small molecule inhibitors to PD1 when bound to PDL2 using computational chemistry techniques. 

	Methods:
This project will start with the initial screening of 6200 small molecules from the ZINC database (4), which will be made up of approved drugs in major jurisdictions, including the FDA. Screening drugs that are already approved worldwide expedites the availability of suitable inhibitors for use as treatment compared to finding new drugs that would need to be approved. Each of these molecules will be docked to the binding pocket formed on PD1 when bound to PDL2 to calculate binding affinity. Binding affinity measures the strength of the interactions between the small inhibitor molecules and the site in which it binds. A program called Qvina will be used to dock the potential inhibitors. Qvina is a virtual screening software that docks small molecules to proteins, which in our case would be PD1. Qvina will provide the docking coordinates and the binding affinity of each small molecule inhibitor on the database of approved drugs in approximately two days. The molecules can be docked simultaneously on several lab computers, which helps streamline the docking process. After collecting all of the information from Qvina for docking, the top 20-25 molecules with the lowest docking scores will be further analyzed through molecular dynamics simulations.
	Molecular dynamics (MD) is a computational simulation method for predicting and studying atomic movements within a closed system. The package used to run the MD calculations will be AMBER. These MD simulations will further approximate each inhibitor’s stability by calculating the energies of each atom within the system. The goal is to run the top 20-25 inhibitors based on docking score through 250 nanosecond simulations, which will take about four days for each inhibitor to complete. Again, access to multiple lab computers can streamline this process. After completing molecular dynamics, binding free energies will be calculated for each potential inhibitor. These calculations will determine the specific binding affinity for each inhibitor more accurately than Qvina did originally. This is due to the program using more rigorous and accurate free energy calculations over an extended period of time. 

	Conclusion:
This project aims to identify a small molecule inhibitor explicitly designed for the allosteric site located on PD1 when bound to PDL2. With this inhibitor, it could be possible to successfully inhibit PD1, which would stop tumor cells from evading the immune system. With this small molecule inhibitor designed, we can potentially find a cheaper, more accessible drug to inhibit the PD1 pathway. With cancer being the second leading cause of death in the United States, there is a necessity to develop a small molecule inhibitor for PD1. 
	
	
	
	References:
Database, G. (n.d.). PDCD1 Gene (Protein Coding). Retrieved February 14, 2021, from https://www.genecards.org/cgi-bin/carddisp.pl?gene=PDCD1
Ostrand-Rosenberg, S., Horn, L., & Haile, S. (2014, October 15). The programmed death-1 immune-suppressive pathway: Barrier to antitumor immunity. Retrieved February 14, 2021, from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4185425/
Tang, S., & Kim, P. S. (2019). A high-affinity human PD-1/PD-L2 complex informs avenues for small-molecule immune Checkpoint drug discovery. PNAS. doi:10.1101/786319
Zinc15. (n.d.). Retrieved February 14, 2021, from http://zinc.docking.org

